ninety-fourth Congress second session
Senate report number 94 - 755 the
investigation of the assassination of
President John F Kennedy performance of
the Intelligence Agency's book 5 final
report of the Select Committee to study
governmental operations with respect to
intelligence activities United States
Senate
April 23rd 1976 1 summary and findings
the Select Committee's investigation of
alleged assassination attempts against
foreign leaders raised questions of
possible connections between these plots
and the assassination of President John
Fitzgerald Kennedy questions were later
raised about whether the agencies
adequately investigated these possible
connections and whether information
about these plots was provided to the
President's Commission on the
assassination of President Kennedy the
Warren Commission as a result pursuant
to its general mandate to review the
performance of the intelligence agencies
the Select Committee reviewed their
specific performance with respect to
their investigation of the assassination
of the president a the scope of the
committee's investigation the committee
did not attempt to duplicate the work of
the Warren Commission it did not review
the findings and conclusions of the
Warren Commission it did not re-examine
the physical evidence which the Warren
Commission had it did not review one of
the principal questions facing the
Commission whether Lee Harvey Oswald was
in fact the assassin of President
Kennedy
instead building upon the Select
Committee's earlier work and utilizing
its access to the agencies and its
expertise and their functions the
committee examined at the performance of
the intelligence agencies in conducting
their investigation of the assassination
and their relationships to the Warren
Commission in the course of this
investigation more than 50 witnesses
were either interviewed or deposed
literally tens of thousands of pages of
documentary evidence were reviewed at
the agencies and more than 5,000 pages
were acquired
in addition the committee relied a great
deal on testimony taken during the
course of its investigation of alleged
plots to assassinate foreign leaders
especially testimony relating to
knowledge of those plots the committee
has been impressed with the ability and
dedication of most of those in the
intelligence community most officials of
the FBI the CIA and other agencies
performed their assigned tasks
thoroughly competently and
professionally supervisors at agency
headquarters
similarly met their responsibilities and
are deserving of the highest praise yet
as this report documents these
individuals did not have access to all
of the information held by the most
senior officials in their own agencies
nor did they control or even influence
many of the decisions made by those
senior officials decisions which shaped
the investigation and the process by
which information was provided to the
Warren Commission thus it cannot be too
strongly emphasized that this report
examines the performance of the senior
agency officials in light of the
information available to them many
potential witnesses could not be called
because of limitations of time and
resources for this reason the committee
has relied a great deal on the
documentary record of events the
committee's report distinguishes
information obtained from documents from
information it obtained it through sworn
testimony through citations since the
documentary records may not accurately
reflect the true events on the other
hand the committee has on many occasions
noted that witnesses may have no
recollection of the events described in
documents which they either prepared or
in which they were mentioned the
following report details the evidence
developed to date the report is intended
to be descriptive of the facts the
committee has developed the committee
believes the investigation should
continue in certain areas and for that
reason does not reach any final
conclusions
instead the Select Committee has
recommended that the Sen
Committee on Intelligence continue this
investigation in those areas where the
Select Committee's investigation could
not be completed the summary in the days
following the assassination of President
Kennedy nothing was more important to
this country than to determine the facts
of his death no one single event has
shaken the country more yet
the evidence the committee has developed
suggests that for different reasons both
the CIA and the FBI failed in or avoided
carrying out certain of their
responsibilities in this matter the
committee emphasizes that this reports
discussion of investigative deficiencies
and the failure of American intelligence
agencies to inform the warren commission
of certain information does not lead to
the conclusion that there was a
conspiracy to assassinate President
Kennedy instead this report details the
evidence the committee developed
concerning the investigation those
agencies conducted into the president's
assassination their relationship with
each other and with the Warren
Commission and the effect their own
operations may have had on the course of
the investigation it places particular
emphasis on the effect their Cuban
operations seemed to have on the
investigation however the committee
cautions that it has seen no evidence
that Fidel Castro or others in the Cuban
government plotted President Kennedy's
assassination in retaliation for US
operations against Cuba the report
details these operations to illustrate
why they were relevant to the
investigation
thus the CIA operation involving a
high-level Cuban official codenamed an
lash is described in order to illustrate
why that operation and its possible
ramifications should have been examined
as part of the assassination
investigation similarly although Cuban
exile groups opposed to Castro may have
been upset with Kennedy administration
actions which restricted their
activities the committee has no evidence
that such groups plotted the
assassination almost from the day Castro
took power in Cuba the United States
became the center of
attempts to depose him Cuban exiles
anti-communists business interests
underworld figures and the United States
government all had their own reasons for
seeking to overthrow the Castro
government these interests generally
operated independently of the others but
on occasion a few from each group would
join forces in a combined effort in
April 1961 a force of Cuban exiles and
soldiers of fortune
backed by the CIA attempted an invasion
of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in November
of that year the United States
government decided that further such
overt paramilitary operations or no
longer feasible and embarked on
Operation Mongoose this operation
attempted to use Cuban exiles and
dissidents inside Cuba to overthrow
Castro when the United States faced a
major confrontation with the Soviet
Union during the October 1962 Cuban
Missile Crisis it terminated Mongoose
the CIA's covert operations against Cuba
were reduced and the FBI and other
agencies of government began to restrict
the paramilitary operations of exile
groups this rather sudden shift against
paramilitary activity of Cuban exile
groups generated hostility supporters of
some of these groups were angered by the
change in government policy they viewed
this as a weakening of the US will to
oppose Castro throughout this period the
CIA had been plotting the assassination
of Castro as another method of achieving
a change in the Cuban government between
1960 and early 1963 the CIA attempted to
use underworld figures for this
assassination by May 1962 the FBI knew
of such plots and in June 1963 learned
of their termination following a June
1963 decision by a special group of the
National Security Council to increase
covert operations against Cuba the CIA
renewed contact with a high-level Cuban
government official codename
and lash at his first meeting with the
CIA in over a year
AM lash proposed Castro's overthrow
through an inside job with us support em
lash considered the assassination of
Castro a necessary part of this inside
job
shortly after this meeting with M lash
Castro issued a public warning reported
prominently in the US press about the
United States meeting with terrorists
who wished to eliminate Cuban leaders he
threatened that Cuba would answer in
kind five days after Castro issued this
threat the Coordinating Committee for
Cuban affairs an interagency planning
committee subordinate to the National
Security Council's special group met to
endorse or modify then existing
contingency plans for possible
retaliation by the Cuban government
representatives of the CIA and of the
state defense and Justice Department's
or on this committee the CIA
representatives on this committee were
from its special affairs staff SAS the
staff responsible for Cuban matters
generally and the am lash operation
those attending the meeting on September
12th agreed unanimously that there was a
strong likelihood Castro would retaliate
in some way against the rash of covert
activity in Cuba at this september 12th
meeting this committee concluded Castro
would not risk major confrontation with
the United States
it therefore rejected the possibility
that Cuba would retaliate
by attacking American officials within
the United States it assigned no agency
the responsibility for consideration of
this contingency within weeks of this
meeting
the CIA escalated the level of its
covert operations in forming a m-- lash
the United States supported his coup
despite warnings from certain CIA
staffers that the operation was poorly
conceived and insecure the head of SAS
Desmond Fitzgerald met M lash on October
29th 1963 told him he was the personal
representative of Attorney General
Robert Kennedy
stated the United States would support a
coup on November 22nd at a pre-arranged
meeting a CIA case officer told M lash
he would be provided rifles with
telescopic sights and explosives with
which to carry out his plan he was also
offered a poison pen device following
the president's death searches of FBI
and CIA files revealed that Lee Harvey
Oswald was not unknown to the
intelligence agencies in late 1959 the
FBI opened a security file on Oswald
after his defection to the Soviet Union
after Oswald's returned to this country
in June 1962 he was interviewed twice by
FBI agents on each occasion he
repeatedly lied he also refused to be
polygraphed about his negative answers
to questions of ties with Soviet
intelligence yet the FBI closed the
Oswald's security case immediately after
the second interview the case was
reopened in March 1963 but Oswald was
not interviewed by the FBI until August
10th 1963 when he requested an interview
after his arrest in New Orleans for
disturbing the peace on the occasion of
this third interview he again repeatedly
lied to FBI agents a month later
Oswald visited Mexico City where he
visited both the Cuban and Soviet
diplomatic establishments and contacted
a vice consul at the latter who was in
fact a KGB agent despite receiving this
information on Oswald's Mexico City
activity the FBI failed to intensify its
investigative efforts it failed to
interview him before the assassination
despite receiving a note from him
warning the FBI to leave his wife alone
immediately after the assassination FBI
director J Edgar Hoover ordered a
complete review of the FBI's handling of
the Oswald security case within six days
he was given a report which detailed
serious investigative deficiencies as a
result of these deficient
he's 17 FBI personnel including one
assistant director were disciplined the
fact that the FBI felt there were
investigative deficiencies and the
disciplinary actions it took were never
publicly disclosed by the bureau or
communicated to the warren commission
the evidence suggests that during the
Warren Commission investigation top FBI
officials were continually concerned
with protecting the bureau's reputation
and avoiding any criticism for not
fulfilling investigative
responsibilities within weeks after the
assassination the FBI at the urging of
senior government officials issued a
report concluding that Oswald was the
assassin and that he had acted alone the
bureau issued its report on the basis of
a narrow investigation focused on Oswald
without conducting a broad investigation
of the assassination which would have
revealed any conspiracy foreign or
domestic despite knowledge of Oswald's
apparent interest in pro-castro and
anti-castro activities and top-level
awareness of certain CIA assassination
plots the FBI according to all agents
and supervisory personnel who testified
before the committee made no special
investigative effort into questions of
possible Cuban government or Cuban exile
involvement in the assassination
independent of the oswald investigation
there is no indication that the FBI or
the CIA directed the interviewing of
cuban sources or of sources within the
Cuban exile community the division of
the FBI responsible for investigating
criminal aspects of the assassination
and not the division responsible for
investigating subversive activities
including those of Cuban groups was
primarily responsible for the
investigation and served as liaison to
the Warren Commission director Hoover
himself perceived the Warren Commission
as an adversary he repeatedly remarked
that the Commission particularly the
Chief Justice was seeking to criticize
the FBI and merely attempting to find
gaps in the FBI's investigation
on two separate occasions the latter
immediately upon release of the
commission's report director Hoover
asked for all derogatory material on
Warren Commission members and staff
contained in the FBI files
neither the CIA nor the FBI told the
Warren Commission about the CIA attempts
to assassinate Fidel Castro Allen Dulles
former director of Central Intelligence
was a member of the Warren Commission
and presumably knew about CIA plots
during his tenure with the agency
although he probably was unaware of the
am lash operation FBI director Hoover
and senior FBI officials also knew about
these earlier plots in July 1964 two
months before the Warren Commission
issued its 26 volume report of its
investigation and findings FBI officials
learned that a Cuban official not known
to the bureau as M lash was plotting
with the CIA to assassinate Castro
however there is no evidence this
knowledge affected the FBI investigation
of the president's assassination in any
way the Attorney General and other
government officials knew there had been
previous assassination plots with the
underworld none of the testimony or
documents received by the Warren
Commission mentioned the CIA
assassination plots the subordinate
officers at the FBI and the CIA who
acted as liaisons with the Warren
Commission did not know the CIA
assassination attempts the am lash plot
was more relevant to the Warren
Commission's work than the early CIA
assassination plots with the underworld
unlike these earlier plots the am lash
operation was in progress at the time of
the assassination unlike the earlier
plots the Hamlisch operation could
clearly be traced to the CIA and unlike
the earlier plots the CIA had endorsed
an lashes proposal for a coup the first
step to him being Castro's assassination
despite Castro's threat to retaliate for
such plotting no one directly involved
in either agency's investigation was
told of the am lash operation
no one investigated a connection between
the am lash operation and
President Kennedy's assassination
although Oswald had been in contact with
pro-castro and anti-castro groups for
many months before the assassination the
CIA did not conduct a thorough
investigation of the questions of Cuban
government or Cuban exile involvement in
the assassination CIA officials
knowledgeable of the am lash plot
testified they did not relate it to the
president's assassination
however those at CIA and FBI responsible
for their agency's investigation
testified to that had they been aware of
the plot they would have considered it
relevant to their investigation the
individual who directed the CIA
investigation for the first month after
the assassination testified that he felt
knowledge of the Hamlisch operation
would have been a vital factor in
shaping his investigation his successor
at the CIA also stated that knowledge of
the am lash plot would have made a
difference in his investigation
individuals on the Warren Commission
staff have expressed similar opinions as
to all plots against Castro there is
also evidence that CIA investigators
requested name traces which should have
made them aware of the am lash operation
but for some reason they did not learn
of that operation although the Warren
Commission concluded its work in
September 1964 the investigation of the
assassination was not to end both FBI
director Hoover and CIA deputy director
for plants Richard Helms pledged to keep
the matter as an open case in 1965 the
FBI and the CIA received information
about the am lash operation which
indicated the entire operation was
insecure and caused the CIA to terminate
it despite the fact that the information
then received might have raised doubts
about the investigation of the
president's assassination
neither agency re-examined the
assassination the assassination of
President Kennedy again came to the
attention of the intelligence agencies
in 1967 President Johnson took a
personal interest in allegations that
Castro had retaliated
although the FBI received such
allegations no investigation was
conducted on the very day President
Johnson received the FBI reports of
these allegations he met with CIA
director Richard Helms the next day
Helms ordered the CIA inspector general
to prepare a report on agency sponsored
assassination plots although this report
raised the question of a possible
connection between the CIA plots against
Castro and the assassination of
President Kennedy it was not furnished
to CIA investigators who were to review
the Kennedy assassination investigation
once again although these CIA
investigators requested information that
should have led them to discover the am
lash operation they apparently did not
receive that information see findings
the committee emphasizes that it has not
uncovered any evidence sufficient to
justify a conclusion that there was a
conspiracy to assassinate President
Kennedy the committee has however
developed evidence which impeaches the
process by which the intelligence
agencies arrived at their own
conclusions about the assassination and
by which they provided information to
the warren commission this evidence
indicates that the investigation of the
assassination was deficient and that
facts which might have substantially
affected the course of the investigation
were not provided the Warren Commission
or those individuals within the FBI and
the CIA as well as other agencies of
government who were charged with
investigating the assassination the
committee has found that the FBI the
agency with primary responsibility in
the matter was ordered by director
Hoover and pressured by higher
government officials to conclude its
investigation quickly the FBI conducted
its investigation in an atmosphere of
concern among senior bureau officials
that it would be criticized and its
reputation tarnished rather than
addressing its investigation to all
significant circumstances including all
possibilities of conspiracy the FBI
investigation focused narrowly on Lee
Harvey Oswald the committee has found
that even with this narrow
the FBI investigation as well as the CIA
inquiry was deficient on the specific
question of the significance of Oswald's
contacts with pro-castro
and anti-castro groups for the many
months before the assassination those
individuals directly responsible for the
investigations were not fully conversant
with the fluctuations in American policy
toward those who opposed Castro and they
lacked a working knowledge of pro-castro
and anti-castro activity they did not
know the full extent of US operations
against Cuba including the CIA efforts
to assassinate Castro the committee
further found that these investigative
deficiencies are probably the reason
that significant leads received by
intelligence agencies were not pursued
senior bureau officials should have
realized the FBI efforts were focused
too narrowly to allow for a full
investigation they should have realized
the significance of Oswald's Cuban
contacts could not be fully analyzed
without the direct involvement of FBI
personnel who had expertise in such
matters
yet these senior officials permitted the
investigation to take this course and
viewed the Warren Commission
investigation in an adversarial light
senior CIA officials also should have
realized that their agency was not
utilizing its full capability to
investigate Oswald's pro-castro and
anti-castro connections they should have
realized that CIA operations against
Cuba particularly operations involving
the assassination of Castro needed to be
considered in the investigation yet they
directed their subordinates to conduct
an investigation without telling them of
these vital facts these officials whom
the Warren Commission relied upon for
expertise advised the Warren Commission
that the CIA had no evidence of foreign
conspiracy why senior officials of the
FBI and the CIA permitted the
investigation to go forward in light of
these deficiencies and why they
permitted the Warren Commission to reach
its conclusion without all relevant
information is still unclear certainly
concerned with public reputation problem
of coordination between agencies
possible bureaucratic failure and
embarrassment and the extreme
compartment ation of knowledge of
sensitive operations may have
contributed to these shortcomings but
the possibility exists that senior
officials in both agencies made
conscious decisions not to disclose
potentially important information
because the Select Committee to study
governmental operations with respect to
intelligence activities ended on May
31st 1976 a final resolution of these
questions was impossible nevertheless
the committee decided to make its
findings public because the people have
a right to know how these special
agencies of the government fulfill their
responsibilities the committee
recommends that its successor the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence the
permanent Senate committee overseeing
intelligence operations continue the
investigation in an attempt to resolve
these questions to assist its successor
this committee has forwarded all files
pertaining to this investigation this
phase of the committee's work will
undoubtedly stir controversy few events
in recent memory have so aroused the
emotions of this nation and of the world
as those in Dallas in November 1963
conspiracy theories and theorists abound
and the public remains unsatisfied
regrettably this report will not put the
matter to rest even after additional
investigative work no additional
evidence may come to light on the
ultimate question of why President
Kennedy was assassinated